Threshold Autoregressive (TAR) Model

To capture asymmetric features in financial data, we need to establish Threshold Autoregressive (TAR) models. For example, a TAR(1) model is constructed as
$$
X_{t}=\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
\alpha_{1} X_{t-1}+u_{t}, & X_{t-1}<c \\
\alpha_{2} X_{t-1}+u_{t}, & X_{t-1} \geq c
\end{array}\right.
$$

for some threshold value $ c $. In a compact form, we write the model as

$$
X_{t}=\alpha_{1} X_{t-1} 1\left(X_{t-1}<c\right)+\alpha_{2} X_{t-1} 1\left(X_{t-1} \geq c\right)+u_{t}
$$

Question: How to estimate $ \alpha_{1}, \alpha_{2} $ and $ c ? $

Why TAR model is able to capture asymmetric features in financial data? We consider the following example.
$$
X_{t}=\left\{\begin{array}{cl}
-1.5 X_{t-1}+u_{t}, & X_{t-1}<0 \\
0.5 X_{t-1}+u_{t}, & X_{t-1} \geq 0
\end{array}\right.
$$

- If $ X_{t-1}<0, $ then there is a very strong tendency for $ X_{t} $ to jump to a positive value.
- If $ X_{t-1}>0, $ then it will tend to take multiple time periods for $ X_{t} $ to reduce to a negative value.

Therefore, there are more positive observations than negative observations.

The Momentum Threshold Autoregressive (MTAR) Model

$$
X_{t}=\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
\alpha_{1} X_{t-1}+u_{t}, & \Delta X_{t-1}<0 \\
\alpha_{2} X_{t-1}+u_{t}, & \Delta X_{t-1} \geq 0
\end{array}\right.
$$

Self-Exciting Threshold Autoregressive (SETAR) Model

We consider a more general case as
$$
X_{t}=\alpha_{0}^{(s)}+\sum_{j=1}^{p} \alpha_{j}^{(s)} X_{t-j}+h^{(s)} u_{t} \text { if } X_{t-d} \in\left(r_{s-1}, r_{s}\right]
$$

for $ s=1,2, \ldots, M, $ where $ \{s\}_{s=1}^{M} $ are different states.

Since **the threshold or regime change is generated by $ \left\{X_{t}\right\} $ itself** rather than by other variables, we call it a Self-Exciting Threshold Autoregressive model.

Example: Managed Foreign Exchange Rates with Floors and Ceilings

$$
X_{t}=\left\{\begin{array}{cc}
a+u_{t}^{(1)} & \text { if } X_{t-1} \leq a \\
X_{t-1}+u_{t}^{(2)} & \text { if } a<X_{t-1}<b \\
b+u_{t}^{(3)} & \text { if } X_{t-1} \geq b
\end{array}\right.
$$

If-Exciting Threshold Autoregressive (SETAR) Model

Example: U.S. quarterly real GNP from 1947:2 to 1991:1.
$$
X_{t}=\left\{\begin{array}{cc}
-0.015-1.076 X_{t-1}+\epsilon_{1 t}, & X_{t-1} \leq X_{t-2} \leq 0 \\
0.630 X_{t-1}-0.756 X_{t-2}+\epsilon_{2 t}, & X_{t-1}>X_{t-2}, X_{t-2} \leq 0 \\
0.006+0.438 X_{t-1}+\epsilon_{3 t}, & X_{t-1} \leq X_{t-2}, X_{t-2}>0 \\
0.433 X_{t-1}+\epsilon_{4 t}, & X_{t-1}>X_{t-2}>0
\end{array}\right.
$$

Remarks:

- Regime 1 : a recession period in which the economy changed from a contraction to an even worse one. The negative explosive nature of the regression function in this regime indicates the economy usually recovers quickly from the recession.
- Regime 2: a period in which the economy was in contraction but improving. Here, the regression function tends to be positive, suggesting that the economy is more likely to grow continuously out of recession once a recovery has started.
- Regime 3: a period in which the economy was reasonable but the growth declined.
- Regime 4: an expansion period in which the economy became
    stronger.

Teräsvirta (1994, JASA)

$$
X_{t}=\left(\alpha_{00}+\sum_{j=1}^{p} \alpha_{0 j} X_{t-j}\right)+F\left(\frac{X_{t-d}-c}{\gamma}\right)\left(\alpha_{10}+\sum_{j=1}^{p} \alpha_{1 j} X_{t-j}\right)+u_{t}
$$

where $ d $ is the delay parameter, $ c $ and $ \gamma $ are parameters representing the location and scale of regime transition, and $ F(.) $ is a smooth transition function, which is usually a continuous cumulative distribution function.

Examples of $ F(.) $ include the $ \mathrm{N}(0,1) \mathrm{CDF}, $ the logistic function, and the
exponential CDF.
Smooth Transition AR (STAR) Model
Logistic function
$$
F(z)=\frac{1}{1+e^{-\gamma(z-c)}}, \quad-\infty<z<\infty
$$

where $ c $ determines the location of regime transition, while $ \gamma $ determines
the smoothness of the regime shift.

Exponential function

$$
F(z)=1-\frac{1}{e^{-\gamma(z-c)^{2}}}, \quad-\infty<z<\infty
$$

where $ c $ determines the location of regime transition, while $ \gamma $ determines
the smoothness of the regime shift.
Exponentitial
0
Financial Economptrics - Part III
Markov-Chain Regime Switching Model
Suppose the time series $ \left\{S_{t}\right\} $ follows a Markov chain on a finite number of
states, say, $ \{1,2, \ldots, M\} $ with transition probability

$$
\operatorname{Pr}\left(S_{t}=j \mid S_{t-1}=i\right)=p_{i j}, \quad i, j=1, \ldots, M
$$

such that $ \sum_{j=1}^{M} p_{i j}=1 $ for all $ i=1,2, \ldots, M $ Remarks:
(i) The state variable $ S_{t} $ is not observable.
(ii) Here, the transition probabilities $ p_{i j} $ are assumed to be constant over
time.

Example: A Two-Stage Regime Switching Model

$$
X_{t}=\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
a_{0}+\sum_{j=1}^{p} a_{j} X_{t-j}+u_{1 t} & \text { if } S_{t}=1 \\
b_{0}+\sum_{j=1}^{p} b_{j} X_{t-j}+u_{2 t} & \text { if } S_{t}=2
\end{array}\right.
$$

where the state variable $ S_{t} $ assumes values \{1,2\} and follows afirst order
Markov chain with transition probabilities

$$
\operatorname{Pr}\left(S_{t}=2 \mid S_{t-1}=1\right)=p_{12}, \operatorname{Pr}\left(S_{t}=1 \mid S_{t-1}=2\right)=p_{21}
$$
The innovations $ \left\{u_{1 t}\right\} $ and $ \left\{u_{2 t}\right\} $ are i.i.d. with mean zero and variances
$ \sigma_{1}^{2} $ and $ \sigma_{2}^{2} $ respectively.
Functional Coefficient Autoregressive Model
Priestley $ (1988), $ and Chen and Tsay $ (1993 \mathrm{a}) $

$$
X_{t}=a_{0}\left(X_{t-d}\right)+\sum_{j=1}^{p} a_{j}\left(X_{t-d}\right) X_{t-j}+u_{t}
$$

Remarks:
(i) This is a semiparametric model because the functional forms for the
$ a_{j}(.) $ are not parametrized. Obviously, the FCAR model is more flexible
than the SETAR model. Most nonlinear time series models discussed
earlier are special cases of the FCAR model.
(ii) When $ a_{j}(.) $ is a smooth function for all $ \mathrm{j}=0,1, \ldots, \mathrm{p}, $ this model can be
considered as a special case of threshold autoregressive model with an
infinite number of threshold states which vary continuously.

Priestley (1988), and Chen and Tsay (1993a)

$$
X_{t}=a_{0}\left(X_{t-d}\right)+\sum_{j=1}^{p} a_{j}\left(X_{t-d}\right) X_{t-j}+u_{t}
$$

Remarks:
(iii) It can be used to model the processes where mean-reverting speeds
are different.
(iv) It can be used to test whether the factor in the CAMP model is
time-varying.
Time-varying Volatility Model
Suppose that

$$
r_{t}=c+\sigma(t / T) \epsilon_{t}
$$

for $ t=1,2, \ldots, T, $ where $ \sigma(t / T) $ is a function defined on [0,1] and $ E\left[\epsilon_{t}\right]=0, E\left[\epsilon_{t}^{2}\right]=1 . $ To estimate the nonparametric function, we have

$$
\left(r_{t}-c\right)^{2}=\sigma^{2}(t / T)+\sigma^{2}(t / T)\left(\epsilon_{t}^{2}-1\right)=\sigma(t / T)^{2}+\eta_{t}
$$

where $ \eta_{t}=\epsilon_{t}^{2}-1 $