Factor Model

Three Types of Asset Return Factor Models
1. Macroeconomic factor model: Factors are observable economic and financial time series
2. Fundamental factor model: Factors are created from observerable asset characteristics
3. Statistical factor model: Factors are unobservable and extracted from asset returns

Suppose that there are $ k $ assets and $ T $ time periods. Let $ r_{i t} $ be the return of asset $ i $ in the time period $ t $. A general form for the factor model is
$$
r_{i t}=\alpha_{i}+\beta_{i 1} f_{1 t}+\ldots+\beta_{i m} f_{m t}+\epsilon_{i t}=\alpha_{i}+b_{i}^{\prime} f_{t}+\epsilon_{i t}
$$

for $ t=1,2, \ldots, T, i=1,2, \ldots, k, $ where $ \alpha_{i} $ is the intercept term,
$ f_{t}=\left(f_{1 t}, \ldots, f_{m t}\right)^{\prime} $ are $ m $ common factors, note that $ f_t $ only changing with time $ t $ not stock $ m $, $ b_{i}=\left(\beta_{i 1}, \ldots, \beta_{i m}\right)^{\prime} $ is called the vector of factor loadings for asset $ i, \epsilon_{i t} $ is the specific factor of asset $ i . $

The factor vector $ f_{t}=\left(f_{1 t}, \ldots, f_{m t}\right)^{\prime} $ is assumed to be an $ m $ -dimensional stationary process such that

$$
\begin{aligned}
E\left(f_{t}\right) &=\mu_{f} \\
\operatorname{Cov}\left(f_{t}\right) &=\Sigma_{f}
\end{aligned}
$$

At time $ t, $ we can write the model as

$$
r_{t}=\alpha+B f_{t}+\epsilon_{t}
$$

where $ r_{t}=\left(r_{1 t}, \ldots, r_{k t}\right)^{\prime} $ is a $ k \times 1 $ vector, $ \alpha=\left(\alpha_{1}, \ldots, \alpha_{k}\right)^{\prime}, B $ is a $ k \times m $ factor loading matrix, and $ \epsilon_{t}=\left(\epsilon_{1 t}, \ldots, \epsilon_{k t}\right)^{\prime} $ for which $ \operatorname{Cov}\left(\epsilon_{t}\right)=D=\operatorname{diag}\left(\sigma_{1}^{2}, \ldots, \sigma_{k}^{2}\right) . $ Then, we have the covariance matrix

$$
\operatorname{Cov}\left(r_{t}\right)=B \Sigma_{f} B^{\prime}+D
$$

For fixed $ i, $ we can write the model as

$$
R_{i}=\alpha_{i} 1_{T}+F b_{i}^{\prime}+E_{i}
$$

where $ R_{t}=\left(r_{11}, \ldots, r_{1} T\right)^{\prime} $ is a $ T \times 1 $ vector, $ 1_{T}=(1, \ldots, 1)^{\prime} $ is a
$ T $ -dimensional vector of ones, $ F $ is a $ T \times m $ matrix whose $ t $ th row is $ f_{t}^{\prime}, $ and $ E_{i}=\left(\epsilon_{i 1}, \ldots, \epsilon_{i T}\right)^{\prime} $ for which $ \operatorname{Cov}\left(E_{i}\right)=\sigma^{2} I_{T} $

Capital Asset Pricing Model

Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
$$
r_{i t}=\alpha_{i}+\beta_{i} r_{m t}+\epsilon_{i t}
$$

for $ i=1,2, \ldots, m, t=1,2, \ldots, T . $ In the model, $ r_{i t} $ is the excess return of as set $ i, r_{m t} $ is the excess return of the market, and $ \beta_{i} $ is the well-known $ \beta $ (Beta) for the asset.

Question: How to interpret $ \alpha_{i} $ and $ \beta_{i} $ in the CAPM?

- $ \beta >1$: Aggressive stock, Exhibits greater volatility than the market portfolio.
- $ \beta=1 $ : Tracking stock, Tracks the market portfolio exactly.
- $ 0<\beta<1 $ : Conservative stock: Exhibits less volatility than the
    market portfolio.
- $ \beta=0 $ : Independence: Independent of the market.
- $ -1<\beta<0 $ : Imperfect hedge: Moves in the opposite direction to the market portfolio.
- $ \beta=-1 $ : Perfect hedge: Moves in the exact opposite direction to the market portfolio.

Fama-French three Factor Model

In the Fama-French (1992,1993) method, combinations of portfolios are constructed to take account of the observed fact that

- Small stocks have higher average returns than large stocks;
- Value stocks have higher average returns than growth stocks;

Therefore, they established the Fama-French three Factor Model (FF3FM) as
$$
r_{i t}=\alpha_{i}+\beta_{i} r_{m t}+\gamma_{i} S M B_{t}+\theta_{i} H M L_{t}+\epsilon_{i t}
$$
for $ i=1,2, \ldots, m, t=1,2, \ldots, T $

In the model,

- $ r_{i t} $ is the excess return of asset $ i $
- $ r_{m t} $ is the excess return of the market;
- $ SMB_t $ is the performance of small stocks relative to large stocks
    - Small firms are more susceptible to changes in economic conditions;
    - $ SMB_t $ is the return on a portfolio long in small stocks and short in large stocks.

- $ \mathrm{HML}_{t} $ is the performance of value stocks to growth stocks
- High book value relative to market value increases the likelihood of financial distress;
- $ HML_t $ is the return on a portfolio long in value stocks and short in growth stocks.

Question: How to interpret $ \gamma_{i} $ and $ \theta_{i} $ in the FF3FM? 

Principal Component Analysis

Suppose that $ r=\left(r_{1}, \ldots, r_{k}\right)^{\prime} $ is a k-dimensional vector of random variables with covariance matrix $ \Sigma_{r} $. A principal component analysis (PCA) is concerned with using a few linear combinations of $ r_{i} $ to explain the structure of $ \Sigma_{r} $

e.g. if $ r $ denotes the monthly return of $ k $ assects, then $ \mathrm{PCA} $ can be used to study the main source of variations of these $ k $ asset returns. PCA is one of the methods of dimension-reduction.

PCA steps:

- Find the variance-covariance matrix of $ r_{t}, $ denoted as $ \Sigma_{r} $
- Compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of $ \Sigma_{r} $
- Find the first $ L $ largest eigenvalues $ \lambda_{1}, \ldots, \lambda_{L} $ and their corresponding eigenvectors $ w=\left(w_{1}, \ldots, w_{L}\right) $
- Finally, $ f_{t}=w^{\prime} r_{t} $