n is labor time, $n^s$ is shopping-time

$$
n^{s}=g(c, m), \quad g_{c}>0, g_{m} \leq 0
$$

when money is enough
$$
\lim _{m \rightarrow \bar{m}} g_{m}=0
$$

g() is marginal utility of shopping-time 

$ \psi=\psi\left(m, n^{s}\right)=c $
where $ \psi_{m} \geq 0, \psi_{n^{s}} \geq 0 $ and $ \psi_{m m} \leq 0, \psi_{n^{s} n^{s}} \leq 0 $



Wang and Yip (1992) characterized the situation in which these two dominate, so that ucmb0 as the transaction services version of the MIU model.

With ucm < 0, a monetary injection that raises expected inflation
will increase consumption, labor supply, and output. (替代效应)

The marginal utility of consumption is set equal to the marginal utility of wealth, $ V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right), $ plus the cost, in utility units, of the marginal time needed to purchase consumption. Thus, the total cost of consumption includes the value of the shopping time involved. A marginal increase in consumption requires an additional $ g_{c} $ in shopping time. The value of this time in terms of goods is obtained by multiplying $ g_{c} $ by the real wage $ w, $ and its value in terms of utility is $ V_{a}(a, k) w g_{c} $.

In chapter 2, i = 0 is the optimal inflation rate

In chapter 3, i = 0 need $g_m = 0$ mean that money is enough to make 



CIA

资本市场先开放的话，则只需要准备购买商品所需的货币即可。

With $ g_{m} \leq 0, v_{l} g_{m}=V_{a} w g_{m} $ is the value in utility terms of the shopping time savings that results from additional holdings of real money balances. Equations (3.5) and (3.8) imply that money will be held to the point where the marginal net benefit, equal to the value of shopping time savings plus the discounted value of money's wealth value in the next period, $ 0 \mathrm{r}-v_{1} \mathrm{~g}_{\mathrm{m}}+\beta \mathrm{V}_{a}\left(a_{\mathrm{l}+1}, \mathrm{k}_{t}\right) /\left(1+\pi_{t+1}\right) $, just equals the
net marginal utility of wealth. The first-order condition for optimal money holdings, together with (3.7) and (3.8) , implies






$$
-v_{l} g_{m}=V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)\left(\frac{i_{t}}{1+i_{t}}\right)
$$
where $ i_{t} $ is the nominal rate of interest and, using (3.7) and (3.8) ,
$ \frac{V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)}{V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)}=\frac{1+\pi_{t+1}}{1+i_{t}} $
$$
\begin{array}{l}
-w_{t} g_{m}=\frac{i_{t}}{1+i_{t}} \\
\qquad-w_{t} g_{m}=\frac{i_{t}}{1+i_{t}}
\end{array}
$$




- When we assume that transaction costs take the form of
real resources that are used up in the process of
exchange, the household's budget constraint (3.18) then
$ f\left(k_{t-1}\right)+(1-\delta) k_{t-1}+\tau_{t}+\left(1+r_{t-1}\right) b_{t-1}+\frac{m_{t-1}}{1+\pi_{t}} \geq c_{t}+m_{t}+b_{t}+k_{t}+\Upsilon\left(c_{t}, m_{t}\right) $
transaction cost term $ \Upsilon $ depends on $ \mathrm{c} $ and $ \mathrm{m} $