---
title: "3. Money and Transactions"
date: 2021-03-28T21:17:53+08:00
lastmod: 2021-03-29T21:17:53+08:00
draft: false

description: ""
upd: ""

tags: ['Notes']
categories: ['Monetary Finance']

math: true
---

## Question

n = 0?
$$
f\left(k_{t-1}, n_{t}\right)+\tau_{t}+(1-\delta) k_{t-1}+\frac{\left(1+i_{t-1}\right) b_{t-1}+m_{t-1}}{1+\pi_{t}}=c_{t}+k_{t}+b_{t}+m_{t}
$$
Typo? beta

where $ i_{t} $ is the nominal rate of interest and, using (3.7) and (3.8),
$$
\frac{V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)}{V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)}=\frac{1+\pi_{t+1}}{1+i_{t}}
$$


## 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we will learn about:

1. Shopping-Time Models
2. CIA Models

In keeping with the approach used in examining money-in-the-utility (MIU) models, the focus in this chapter is on general equilibrium models in which the demand for money arises from its use in carrying out transactions.

## 3.2 Resource Costs of Transacting

A direct approach to modeling the role of money in facilitating transactions is to **assume that the purchase of goods requires the input of transaction services**. 

1. First a model is considered in which theses services are produced using inputs of money and time. 
2. Then an alternative approach is studied in which there are real resource costs in terms of goods that are incurred in purchasing consumption goods. 

Larger holdings of money allow the household to reduce the resource costs of producing transaction services.

### 3.2.1 Shopping-Time Models

Higher levels of money holdings reduce the time needed for shopping, thereby increasing the individual agent’s leisure.

Suppose that purchasing consumption requires transaction services $ \psi, $ with units chosen so that consumption of $ c $ requires transaction services $ \psi=c . $ These transaction services are produced with inputs of real cash balances $ m \equiv M / P $ and shopping time $ n^{s} $ :
$$
 \psi=\psi\left(m, n^{s}\right)=c  \tag{3.1}
$$
where $ \psi_{m} \geq 0, \psi_{n^{s}} \geq 0 $ and $ \psi_{m m} \leq 0, \psi_{n^{s} n^{s}} \leq 0 $. 

Rewriting (3.1) in terms of the shopping time required for given levels of consumption and money holdings,
$$
n^{s}=g(c, m), \quad g_{c}>0, g_{m} \leq 0
$$
Household utility is assumed to depend on consumption and leisure: $ v(c, l) . $ Leisure is equal to $ l=1-n-n^{s} $, where $ n $ is time spent in market employment and $ n^{s} $ is time spent shopping. Total time available is normalized to equal $ 1 . $ 

Now define a function
$$
u(c, m, n) \equiv v[c, 1-n-g(c, m)] 
$$
that gives utility as a function of consumption, labor supply, and money holdings. Thus, a simple shopping-time model can motivate the appearance of an MIU function and, more important, can help determine the properties of the partial derivatives of the function $ u $ with respect to $ m $. By placing restrictions on the partial derivatives of the shopping time production function $ g(c, m), $ one potentially can determine what restrictions might be placed on the utility function $ u(c, m, n) . $ 

In the MIU model, higher expected inflation lowered money holdings, but the effect on leisure and consumption depended on the signs of $ u_{l m} $ and $ u_{c m} $. The shopping-time model implies that $ u_{m}=-v_{l} g_{m} \geq 0, $ so
$$
u_{c m}=\left(v_{l l} g_{c}-v_{c l}\right) g_{m}-v_{l} g_{c m} \tag{3.2}
$$
From (3.2), the assumption of diminishing marginal utility of leisure $ \left(v_{l l} \leq 0\right) $ and $ g_{m} \leq 0 $ implies that $ v_{l l} g_{c} g_{m} \geq 0 $. In the benchmark MIU model, $u_{cm}$ was taken to be positive. Check whether this assumption was reasonable:

1. $u_{c m} >0$: If greater consumption raises the marginal productivity of money in reducing shopping time $ \left(g_{c m} \leq 0\right) $, then $ -v_{l} g_{c m} \geq 0 $ as well. Wang and Yip (1992) characterized the situation in which these two dominate, so that $ u_{c m} \geq 0 $ as the **transaction services version of the MIU model.** In this case, the MIU model implies that a rise in expected inflation would lower $ m $ and $ u_{c}, $ and this would lower consumption, labor supply, and output (see section 2.3.2). The reduction in labor supply is reinforced by the fact that $ u_{l m}=-v_{l l} g_{m}<0 $, so that the reduction in $ m $ raises the marginal utility of leisure. 

2. $ u_{c m} <0$: If consumption and leisure are strong substitutes so that $ v_{c l} \leq 0, $ then $ u_{c m} $ could be negative, a situation Wang and Yip described as corresponding to **an asset substitution model**. With $ u_{c m}<0 $, a monetary injection that raises expected inflation will increase consumption, labor supply, and output.

The household's objective is to maximize
$$
\sum_{i=0}^{\infty} \beta^{i} v\left[c_{t+i}, 1-n_{t+i}-g\left(c_{t+i}, m_{t+i}\right)\right], \quad 0<\beta<1
$$
subject to
$$
f\left(k_{t-1}, n_{t}\right)+\tau_{t}+(1-\delta) k_{t-1}+\frac{\left(1+i_{t-1}\right) b_{t-1}+m_{t-1}}{1+\pi_{t}}=c_{t}+k_{t}+b_{t}+m_{t}
$$
where $ f $ is a standard neoclassical production function, $ k $ is the capital stock, $ \delta $ is the depreciation rate, $ b $ and $ m $ are real bond and money holdings, and $ \tau $ is a real lump-sum transfer from the government. Defining $ a_{t}=\tau_{t}+\left[\left(1+i_{t-1}\right) b_{t-1}+m_{t-1}\right] / $ $ \left(1+\pi_{t}\right), $ the household's decision problem can be written in terms of the value function $ V\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right) $:
$$
V\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)=\max_{c,m,b,l} \left\{v\left[c_{t}, 1-n_{t}-g\left(c_{t}, m_{t}\right)\right]+\beta V\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)\right\}
$$
where the maximization is subject to the constraints $ f\left(k_{t-1}, n_{t}\right)+(1-\delta) k_{t-1}+a_{t} $ $ =c_{t}+k_{t}+b_{t}+m_{t} $ and $ a_{t+1}=\tau_{t+1}+\left[\left(1+i_{t}\right) b_{t}+m_{t}\right] /\left(1+\pi_{t+1}\right) . $ Proceeding as in
chapter 2 by using these two constraints to eliminate $ k_{t} $ and $ a_{t+1} $ from the expression for the value function, the necessary first-order conditions for consumption, real money holdings, real bond holdings, and labor supply are
$$
\begin{align}
&v_{c}-v_{l} g_{c}-\beta V_{k}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)=0 \tag{3.4} \\
&-v_{l} g_{m}+\beta \frac{V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)}{1+\pi_{t+1}}-\beta V_{k}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)=0 \tag{3.5} \\
& -v_{l}+\beta V_{k}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right) f_{n}\left(k_{t-1}, n_{t}\right)=0 \tag{3.6} \\
& \beta\left(\frac{1+i_{t}}{1+\pi_{t+1}}\right) V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)-\beta V_{k}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)=0 \tag{3.7}
\end{align}
$$
and the envelope theorem yields
$$
\begin{align}
& V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)=\beta V_{k}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right) \tag{3.8} \\
& V_{k}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)=\beta V_{k}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)\left[f_{k}\left(k_{t-1}, n_{t}\right)+1-\delta\right] \tag{3.9} 
\end{align}
$$
Letting $ w_{t} $ denote the **marginal product of labor** (i.e., $ w_{t}=f_{n}\left(k_{t-1}, n_{t}\right)$), (3.6) and (3.8) yield $ v_{l}=w_{t} V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right) $. This implies that (3.4) can be written as
$$
v_{c}\left(c_{t}, l_{t}\right)=V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)\left[1+w_{t} g_{c}\left(c_{t}, m_{t}\right)\right] \tag{3.10}
$$
The marginal utility of consumption is set equal to the marginal utility of wealth, $ V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right), $ plus the cost, in utility units, of the marginal time needed to purchase consumption. Thus, the total cost of consumption includes the value of the shopping time involved. A marginal increase in consumption requires an additional $ g_{c} $ in shopping time. The value of this time in terms of goods is obtained by multiplying $ g_{c} $ by the real wage $ w, $ and its value in terms of utility is $ V_{a}(a, k) w g_{c} $.

With $ g_{m} \leq 0, v_{l} g_{m}=V_{a} w g_{m} $ is the value in utility terms of the shopping time savings that results from additional holdings of real money balances. Equations (3.5) and (3.8) imply that money will be held to the point where the marginal net benefit, equal to the value of shopping time savings plus the discounted value of money's wealth value in the next period, or $ -v_{l} g_{m}+\beta V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right) /\left(1+\pi_{t+1}\right), $ just equals the net marginal utility of wealth. 

The first-order condition for optimal money holdings(3.5), together with (3.7) and (3.8) , implies
$$
\begin{align}
-v_{l} g_{m} &=\beta V_{k}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)-\beta \frac{V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)}{1+\pi_{t+1}} \\
&=V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)\left[1-\beta \frac{V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right) / V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)}{1+\pi_{t+1}}\right]\\
&=V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)\left[1-\left(\frac{1}{1+i_{t}}\right)\right] \\
&=V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)\left(\frac{i_{t}}{1+i_{t}}\right) \tag{3.11}
\end{align}
$$
where $ i_{t} $ is the nominal rate of interest and, using (3.7) and (3.8),
$$
\frac{V_{a}\left(a_{t+1}, k_{t}\right)}{V_{a}\left(a_{t}, k_{t-1}\right)}=\frac{1+\pi_{t+1}}{1+i_{t}} \frac{1}{\beta}
$$
Further insight can be gained by using (3.6) and (3.8) to note that (3.11) can also be written as
$$
-w_{t} g_{m}=\frac{i_{t}}{1+i_{t}} \tag{3.12}
$$
The left side of this equation is the value of the transaction time saved by holding additional real money balances. At the optimal level of money holdings, this is just equal to the opportunity cost of holding money, $ i /(1+i) $.

**Since no social cost of producing money has been introduced, optimality would require that the private marginal product of money, $ g_{m}, $ be driven to zero. Equation (3.12) implies that $ g_{m}=0 $ if and only if $ i=0 $;** one thus obtains the standard result for the optimal rate of inflation, as seen earlier in the MIU model.

####Evaluation

The chief advantage of the shopping-time approach as a means of motivating the presence of money in the utility function is its use in tying the partials of the utility function with respect to money to the specification of the production function relating money, shopping time, and consumption. But this representation of the medium-of-exchange role of money is also clearly a shortcut. The transaction services production function $ \psi\left(m, n^{s}\right) $ is simply postulated; this approach does not help to determine what constitutes money. Why, for example, do certain types of green paper facilitate transactions (at least in the United States), whereas yellow pieces of paper don't? Section 3.4 reviews models based on search theory that attempt to derive money demand from a more primitive specification of the transaction
process.

### 3.2.2 Real Resource Costs





CIA

资本市场先开放的话，则只需要准备购买商品所需的货币即可。

当代西方宏观经済学中另一广泛使用的是货币先行( cash in advance或CA)模型。该模型由克拉奥( Clower,1967)首先提出，其前提是**消费必须用货币来购买。从技术上讲，这相当于给模型増加了一个现金约束。**克拉奥之后，大卫斯托克曼( David Stockman,1981)发展了**不仅消费品而目投资品也要用货币来购买的模型**，罗伯特卢卡斯( Robert E. Lucas)和断道克曼(1983,1987)此后又将消费品分为必须用现金购买(现金物品和可用信货购买（信货物品）的两部分。CIA模型的优点在于它在保持动态最优分析的同时可以很容易地推导出货币需求。







When we assume that transaction costs take the form of
real resources that are used up in the process of
exchange, the household's budget constraint (3.18) then
$ f\left(k_{t-1}\right)+(1-\delta) k_{t-1}+\tau_{t}+\left(1+r_{t-1}\right) b_{t-1}+\frac{m_{t-1}}{1+\pi_{t}} \geq c_{t}+m_{t}+b_{t}+k_{t}+\Upsilon\left(c_{t}, m_{t}\right) $
transaction cost term $ \Upsilon $ depends on $ \mathrm{c} $ and $ \mathrm{m} $